---
title: carbonOS 2022.3 Release!
author: Adrian Vovk
modified_date: 2023-01-02
---

I hope all of you have had a happy holiday season, and happy New Years!
Today, I'm excited to announce the fourth alpha of carbonOS: 2022.3!

<div class="alert alert-danger" role="alert">
  <h4 class="alert-heading">Installation Issue!</h4>
  I've been made aware of an issue that makes it impossible for carbonOS to be
  installed from the 2022.3 ISO. There is a workaround, which I've described in
  the <a href="/support/installation.html">installation instructions</a>
</div>

## What is carbonOS?

carbonOS is an independent Linux distribution that focuses on UX and robust system
design more than it does on compatibility with Linux tradition. It is an atomic
distribution, which means that OS updates are always safe. The system's layout
ensures the integrity of system files. Unlike other atomic distros, carbonOS does
not attempt to keep around traditional package management features: carbonOS is
Flatpak-first for your apps and container-first for everything else. This will
allow carbonOS to achieve unique features, like Verified/Secure Boot.

carbonOS's end goal is to be a distro that uses Linux's unique capabilities
to provide a secure, stable, and robust environment for users' apps and work. I
want it to be a general-purpose OS that the user doesn't have to think about.
Users should be able to game on it, work on it, program on it, and do
whatever else they want without ever having to worry about the technical
details of their operating system. Basically, I'd love to fulfill the "GnomeBook"
dream: an OS as maintenance-free as Chrome OS, but as powerful as a real
desktop OS and all without compromising the users' ultimate freedom over their
hardware.

If you'd like a detailed explanation of the project, including its development
history, please see [the very first release announcement](/blog/2021-11-25-release.html)!

## What's New?

- **Anniversary!** This Christmas, carbonOS turned 4 years old!
- **Updated software:** Including the latest 6.0-series kernel, and the latest
  bug and security fixes from various upstream projects.
- **GNOME:** Graphite DE has now been retired, and carbonOS has switched to
  GNOME. I intend to keep my build of GNOME very vanilla, only applying some
  patches that are likely to eventually make their way upstream and that
  substantially improve UX.
- **Input Methods:** Switching to GNOME has allowed the use of IBus input methods. You
  can now type in CJK languages (any many others!) using Pinyin, Anthy, etc.
- **Accessibility:** Switching to GNOME has allowed the use of various accessibility
  technologies in carbonOS. Support for this is currently largely untested, but
  it seems like the screen reader and various other accessibility tools have at
  least basic function.
- **Taming OOMD:** Previously `systemd-oomd` was configured to be very aggressive
  at stopping user apps for using too much memory. It has now been re-tuned to be
  a little friendlier, and more suitable for a desktop use-case.
- **Distrobox:** [Distrobox](https://distrobox.privatedns.org/#distrobox) is now
  packaged and included in carbonOS out of the box! This is the recommended tool
  to manage pet-containers and do traditional Linux package management on carbonOS.
- **Removal of `nsbox`:** `nsbox` has been removed from carbonOS, hopefully
  temporarily. The `nsbox` upstream is working on a potential rewrite. It
  will likely be reintroduced once the project stabilizes upstream
  
We've got a few features that are still a work-in-progress:
- **NVIDIA support:** All the bits are in place, but they are not yet configured
  quite correctly and the OS is likely to not boot. This needs a little more work
  still, and probably a special NVIDIA-specific build of the OS.

There's also a significant known issue:
- **"Installation Failed" Error during installation:** If you've followed the
  installation instructions linked from the  warning banner at the top of this page,
  you still might see an "Installation Failed" error message after the installation
  is done. This is a known issue, and it is likely that the installation has
  actually succeeded. You can ignore that error and simply reboot the system.

## What's Next?

Loads more work needs to be done before carbonOS will be ready for everyday,
production use. For the next few releases, I'm planning on focusing on these
areas:

- **Handle Fosshost Sunset:** [Fosshost](https://fosshost.org/), our current
  hosting provider, is sunsetting their services. We will need to take action
  about this.
- **Preinstalled Flatpaks:** Currently, we ship all of our preinstalled apps
  as part of the OS image. However, most apps don't actually need to be a part of
  the OS, and in fact many (most notably the browser) would benefit from running
  in a Flatpak container: faster updates, better security, sandboxing/isolation,
  codecs, and so on. This change will also allow users to uninstall most of the default
  apps if un-needed or if they prefer to use something else.
  For more info, and to follow the development of this feature, check out the
  [issue on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/carbonOS/build-meta/-/issues/125)
- **System integrity and data protection:** Using technologies like Secure Boot,
  TPM, systemd-homed, and many others, carbonOS will verify the integrity of
  every bit of operating system data at boot and during runtime. carbonOS will
  also fully encrypt all user data. Of course, you own your device so you will
  be able to disable this integrity check. To be implemented properly, this
  feature will need lots of upstream work, so it is still a long while away.
  For more info, and to follow the development of this feature, check out the
  [issue on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/carbonOS/build-meta/-/issues/44)
- **Build Enhancements:** There's still lots of work to do to improve the
  build process of carbonOS, including (but not limited to) setting up CI/CD,
  creating shared build artifact caches, and porting to the new BuildStream 2.
  These changes combined should allow me to fall into a much faster release cycle.
- **ARM:** An `aarch64` port might be on the horizon for the coming year! From
  there, a [GNOME Mobile](https://blogs.gnome.org/shell-dev/2022/09/09/gnome-shell-on-mobile-an-update/)
  edition of carbonOS could be possible
- **Incomplete features:** Finish up the incomplete features listed in the
  "What's New" section.
  
For more detail on these changes and to track progress, check out
the [milestone](https://gitlab.com/groups/carbonOS/-/milestones/5) on GitLab!

## Contributing

If you're interested in contributing, there are many different ways you can!
If you'd like to test out carbonOS, you can download it [here](/download).
If you'd like to contribute code or translation, check out the
[source code]({{ site.external_urls.git }})
and join the development channel: [#carbonOS on Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#carbonOS:matrix.org).
Thank you!
